In this lecture, you're going to learn about the other address classes,
that's
Class D
and Class E. You saw in the last lecture
that Classes A, B, and C include all of the addresses that are valid to be assigned to our end hosts, and
those addresses went up from a one in the first octet, up to two, to three.
But you're maybe thinking, what about 224.0.0.0 to 255.255.255.255?
Because you know that the maximum value in each of our octets is 255,
we only went up to 223.
Well, the next class is Class D, and Class D is used for multicast addresses.
You'll learn about what multicast is right on the next slide. With Class D,
the four high-order bits, the first four bits, in the first octet are always set to the binary value of
1 1 1 0.
We can actually count this up. If you look at the first octet down in the bottom on the left here, we've
assigned the bits 1 1 1 0,
a Class D always begins like that.
So if we added these up, 128 plus 24 plus 32 is 224.
So the lowest address is going to be 224, and then the remaining bits over to the right are 8,
4, 2, and 1.
If we add those up, it adds up to 15, and 224 plus 15 adds up to 239.
So, that's where we get the range of 224 to 239 from. These Class D addresses, they're not allocated to
hosts, and there's no default subnet mask. They're used just for multicast traffic. So to see how multicast
works, let's do a quick review of unicast first.
I've got my sender over on the left, which has got the source IP address 10.10.10.10, and
it's going to send traffic to destinations at 10.10.10.15 and
10.10.20.15
So it sends traffic to 10.10.10.15, and if you look in the packet in the Layer 3
IP header, you would see the source IP address is 10.10.10.10.
The destination is 10.10.10.15, and if we're using a /24 subnet mask, they're both in
the same subnets so that traffic can go directly between the hosts without having to go via a router.
Let's say that the host then sends traffic to the other hosts up in the top right.
Let's say that this is a video stream that we're sending again.
So we've unicast it to 10.10.10.15,
we then unicast it to 10.10.20.15 as well.
If you look in the IP header, again, unicast traffic, the source address is 10.10.10.10,
the destination address is 10.10.20.15.
Again, we were using that /24 subnet mask,
so they're on different networks,
so the traffic is going to have to go via a router.
And if this was video streaming we were doing here,
it's two completely separate pieces of traffic, so it's going to use 2 MB if it was 1 MB per stream.
We can improve this by using multicast traffic. With multicast traffic,
we're going to send one copy of the traffic from 10.10.10.10, and that one copy
is going to get sent to 10.10.10.15 and 10.10.20.15 as well.
We are going to run an application on the sender, which is going to send it as multicast traffic, and in
our example, we're going to send it to a destination multicast address of 239.0.0.1.
It still comes from the same source address of 10.10.10.10, and the destinations
still have their normal unicast addresses there as well,
but we send it to this special multicast address. That will then go to all of the hosts that were interested
in getting that traffic.
A good analogy of this is you can think of it like tuning into a radio station.
So on those hosts, 10.10.10.15 and 10.10.20.15,
they run an application on there that said they wanted to receive the stream for 239.0.0.1.
As long as you've configured support for this on your routers, that traffic will get forwarded to all of the
hosts that are interested in receiving it. And the benefit you get is,
for example, here, we're only sending 1 MB worth of bandwidth rather than 2 MB, and if there was 50 interested
hosts, it would still just be 1 MB worth of bandwidth rather than 50 MB. So, you save a lot on the
bandwidth that you're using. It makes things a lot more efficient.
Moving on to Class E addresses, they are experimental and reserved for future use.
The first bits in a Class E are always set to 1 1 1 1.
So again, if we count it up, that's going to give us the possible values of 240.0.0.0
to 255.255.255.
Just like our Class D multicast addresses, these addresses do not have a default subnet mask.
There is one special address that is actually used in Class E, which is the broadcast address of
255.255.255.255.
That is the broadcast address for 'this network', meaning whatever network the source is on, it's a broadcast
for that network.
Actually, while we're talking about broadcast traffic, let's just go back to the previous slide for a minute,
and I'll explain further about why multicast is different and can be more efficient than broadcast
traffic.
Notice in the example here, on the local subnet, the hosts that are attached to the switch, it only went
to the top host at 10.10.10.15.
The traffic did not get sent down to the host below that at the bottom. If this was broadcast traffic,
it would be sent to all hosts on that subnet, not just the ones that wanted it. So multicast is more targeted,
it's more efficient.
Another difference is that as long as you configured your routers to support it, routers will forward
multicast traffic,
so that's how we were able to get it to the host up in the top right. Broadcast
traffic does not go outside its own local subnet. It does not get forwarded by routers by default.
Okay, so about was our Class D and our Class E addresses. These Class E reserved addresses, they are never really
used.
You need to know what they are, and particularly for the CCNA exam. But in real world, you'll never come
across Class E addresses. They're not used in production environments. Class D
addresses are used
if you're using multicast.
Okay,
so that was our Class D and our Class E addresses.
Let's just have a look at a summary of the different classes before we move on. So, Class A is 1 to 126 in the
first octet.
The default subnet mask is a /8.
Class B is 128 to 191, and that defaults to a /16.
Class C is 192 to 223, and that defaults to a /24. Classes A, B, and C are the classes that can be assigned
to hosts. Class D is for multicast, that uses 224 to 239,
and Class E is experimental. That's 240 to 255. You want to have these classes committed to memory,
not just for the CCNA exam, where they're completely essential. They're also completely essential for real
world networking as well.
Okay, that's it.
See you in the next lecture.